Hey guys.
Welcome back to the course in this lecture we're going to talk about a common scenario with contracting
where the freelancer asked for money up front so you might have run into this problem where you found
a couple of people that you like or maybe even little to down to the one person you want to work with
and that person is first kind of response to you before they start the project is I need X amount of
money up front.
Now there is a wide range of ways at looking at this in general asking for some money upfront is not
unrealistic.
Why.
Because if you're doing a milestone system or you're doing a project it makes sense that you put some
money down to make sure that you're serious about the project.
If you have zero dollars upfront there's nothing stopping you as the employer from just deciding halfway
through that you don't like the person you're working with and giving it to someone else.
So realistically they're looking for protection from that exact scenario.
Now how much money they ask up front.
That's where we get kind of into the details what's realistic and what's not.
The biggest thing to look at when determining how realistic the money they're looking they're asking
for upfront is how popular is this freelancer you're working with a firm or a studio.
It's not uncommon at all that they ask for a significant chunk of the money upfront.
Why.
Well because they have to schedule a lot of time with their workers with their freelancers.
They probably have expenses up front and they allocate a lot of their management time towards you.
A freelancer doesn't have overhead costs so they're probably going to ask for less.
They should still be asking for some money up front but it's never going to be as much as what a studio
or a company would ask for.
So the biggest thing to look for is how popular are they.
They have extensive experience working with clientele they have very positive remarks on their profiles.
It might be acceptable that they ask for all the way up to 50 percent up front.
Now if they do not have much of a track record they have fewer views and they haven't been freelancing
as long.
I would never expect to pay them 50 percent up front.
I might expect to pay them 10 percent or 20 percent or however you desire design your milestone payments.
Maybe they just asked for one milestone payment upfront and again never said that milestone to them
use an escrow service now I think 50 percent is the maximum you should ever pay upfront.
Why.
Well because a lot of times you have a project that is so short and duration that it doesn't make sense
to break up into milestones.
And also as such the case that a lot of different expertise and people with certain skill sets are just
used to that format.
Graphic Designers typically will ask for 50 percent up front 50 percent at the end.
It makes a lot of sense in scenarios where it's really hard to segment the work up like a designer can't
say I'm halfway done with this button.
That's a milestone too.
I'm halfway done with this page.
It's a milestone 3.
It just that's not really how that works in graphic design.
It's kind of more of a push where everything kind of develops all at once and then they get to a point
where they're finished and then they go through iterations of editing.
So if you're working with the designer 50/50 that's totally normal working with the development firm.
It's big 50.
It makes sense if they're a popular firm if they're less popular.
Never heard of them don't have a big track record.
You might want to negotiate something lower but you should always expect to pay something up front.
Another thing to take into consideration is a lot of these freelancers have upfront costs.
So if you're building out something that requires them to pay money for something upfront it might be
realistic that they ask for some money upfront.
So you are building a web site and they're going to use a paid tool and integrate it into your service
while they don't have to pay for it and then put it in.
So realistically you should probably give them some funds to put it in for the licensing for the subscription
or whatever it is that they need to actually complete your project past that that's really all it is.
Take a guess at how popular they are.
How realistic it is that they might need cash upfront and kind of formulate that into what you'd expect
to pay upfront.
Remember it's always negotiable but be prepared to pay 50 percent upfront if you really really like
the freelancer that you're about to work with.
Pass that if someone asks you for 100 percent up front obviously never do that.
I mean that is just doesn't make sense in any scenario ever if anyone ever asked for that or more than
50 percent upfront just say no.
That person is just not realistic.
They don't have experience freelancing or it is their intention to probably scam you in some way.
So just don't ever do that if you're ever going over 50 percent makes absolutely no sense and always
use an escrow service.
All right guys.
Any other questions any weird scenarios you've had just post in the group discussion.
Love to hear it.
Loved actually talk about it.
Help you guys through it.
So seeing the next lecture.